https://www.anpc.asn.au/wp-content/uploads/2025/08/6.-Seed-Collection.pdf
https://nre.tas.gov.au/
https://www.understorey-network.org.au/

https://nre.tas.gov.au/conservation/forms-and-permits/scientific-permits-and-authorities-to-collect-native-flora


















Assessment Task 1 – Written Questions
Student name	
Date	
Unit code and title	AHCECR305 Collect native seed
Instructions for Assessment Task 1: 	This assessment comprises 15 written questions.  You must answer each question, using full sentences.  
Your teacher will provide any resources required for this task.
Your teacher will negotiate a due date for this assessment task.  If you are required to resubmit, your teacher will negotiate resubmission dates with you.
This assessment task is open book and will be submitted via Canvas.
There is no time limit assigned to this task.


1.	Name three (3) of the main Acts that protect the ‘taking’ of native flora	Complete 
Answers could include: 
•	Threatened Species Protection Act 1995
•	Nature Conservation Act 2002
•	National Parks and Reserves Management Act 2002
•	Environmental Protection and Biodiversity Conservation Act 1999
•	Crown Lands Act 1976
1)	
2)	
3)	

2.	When is a permit required for seed collection	Complete 
Whenever you are collecting from a site with reserve status under the National Parks and Reserves Management Act 2002, game reserves, public reserves under the Crown Lands Act 1976 or state forests and forest reserves.

3.	List the information required when preparing a work plan for seed collection	Complete 
Tools and equipment, location, time of year, species required, permits if required, who is collecting, access. Review: changes to environmental conditions, weather, changes to expected flowering and fruiting season, weather or access. Fire, nesting sites or animal habitats. Changes to landholders

4.	What WHS policies and procedures are undertaken prior to collecting and cleaning seed	Complete 
Complete risk assessment, wear PPE, undertake training, clean and maintained tools and equipment, notify a responsible person where you are going if working alone

5.	What equipment can be used for collecting seed above 2m	Complete 
Pole pruner and ground sheet, a rifle can be used with permission to shoot seeds off high branches, ladder, ropes, binoculars, bow and arrow

6.	When collecting seed, what do you look for to ensure fruit is ripe and plants are healthy	Complete 
Correct ripening stage e.g. brown or grey in colour for woody fruit, free of insects, allied pests and disease and true to type

7.	Describe three (3) methods of seed collection	Complete 
Answers could include:
Taking advantage of fallen limbs; pole pruner, secateurs or loppers for removing smaller branched or seed bunches; using a pole pruner to drop small branches or seed onto tarpaulin, hand picking, cover seed lot with hessian or other bags to catch highly dehiscent seed
1)	
2)	
3)	

8.	What sustainability practices should you follow to protect plants and the environment during seed collection	Complete 
Answers could include
•	Collect no more than 20 % of seed from a single specimen
•	Avoid collecting from areas regenerating from fire damage
•	Minimise environmental damage by respecting surrounding plants, watch your step and be wary of nests and habitat of native animals.
•	Take advantage of fallen branches
•	Clean footwear, tools and equipment

9.	a) What is the purpose of collecting seed from similar location to the revegetation site? 

b) What is this called?	Complete 
a)	Species collected from the same or similar location and/or closely matched planting site will have adapted to the same environmental conditions e.g. Rainfall, temperature and basic soil attributes
b)	Provenance

10.	What pests, diseases or weather conditions may be detrimental to collected and stored seed?	Complete 
Mould, mice, boring insects, ants, cockroaches. Rain can cause mould to grow on stored seeds

11.	Outline the procedures that may be used for cleaning seed and storing seed	Complete 
Once collected, fruit and/or seed is separated from leaves, twigs and any other foreign matter. Depending on the species and fruit type, seed can be extracted by leaving in paper bag in warm location, low temperature oven, threshing and winnowing or fermentation process. Seeds need to be dried. Spread seed out on a plate, table or any flat surface and moving around to reduce moisture retention. 
After separation, transfer seed to a dry, pest proof container and label with botanical name, location, date collected. This depends on workplace requirements. You could also record collectors name, Easting and Northing coordinates and number of plants

12.	Explain how biosecurity threats are minimised when collecting and storing seed	Complete 
Bio security is minimised by ensuring clean tools and equipment. Reduce the spread of weeds or pests and diseases that may be at the collection site

13.	Explain what to do if you are unsure of the species collected	Complete 
Take a voucher sample, photograph, and location details

14.	What are the basic requirements for good seed storage?	Complete 
The basic requirements for good storage are to ensure that seed is:
•	collected from fruit that is fully mature
•	weighed
•	well dried and cleaned
•	stored in airtight containers
•	stored at constant temperature
Ziplock bags, air tight containers, some seeds need refrigeration and some can be stored at room temperature. Fill containers and close lids firmly

15.	What is the minimal information required on labelled seed	Complete 
Genus species, date, collector, location


Assessment Task 1 – Written Questions
Comments and feedback	
Assessor name	
Assessor signature	
Date	
☐ Satisfactory
☐ Not Satisfactory / Resubmit required	 ☐ Resubmit Due	
 
Assessment Task 2 – Work Plan and Collection Record
Student name	
Date	
Unit code and title	AHCECR305 Collect native seed
Instructions for Assessment Task 2:	Students are required to collect, record, and store for ten (10) native species listed in their Work Plan. 
Students must complete:
•	Permit for collection of seed 
•	Risk assessment for Work Health and Safety  
•	Environmental impact assessment
•	Checklist for tools and equipment
•	Work plan/review for seed collecting
•	Results recorded on seed collection record for 10 native species
Workplans may vary for each work site.  The work plan attached is an example only, but all criteria must be covered.  
Fulltime program and students without a workplan can work with the teacher to design a work plan that can be adapted to their workplace.
 Students are required to review the workplan with supervisor/teacher and make any necessary changes.
Your teacher will negotiate a due date and submission method for this task.

 
Work plan and recording of collected seed
(These are examples to be used if records not available at your workplace)

1. Following your work plan, sustainably collect, clean, weigh and store seed for a minimum of ten (10) native species.  This is to be recorded on the seed collection record

You must have a minimum of one (1) from the following fruit types: 
Fruit Type	Example
A   Fleshy	(Native currant)
B   Dry Dehiscent	(Leptospermum species)
C   Dry Indehiscent	(Poa species)

Species list for seed collection can be negotiated with your teacher/ workplace.

Students are to research or visit sites for confirmation of availability and timing of seed collection.

Quantity to be negotiated with teacher or workplace

Example of species that may be collected:

1. Acacia melanoxylon (B)	6. Acacia verticillate (B)
2. Leptospermum scoparium (B)	7. Poa poiformis (C)
3. Eucalyptus obliqua (B)	8. Carex appressa (C)
4. Lomatia tinctoria (B)	9. Melaleuca squarrosa (B)
5. Billardiera longiflora (A)	10. Tasmannia lanceolata (A)

2. Record location on seed record. 
•	Permit/permission to collect: (attach as a separate document if necessary)
•	Confirm on checklist
•	Complete a Permit application form to apply for the ‘taking’ of native flora for one (1) collection site.
https://nre.tas.gov.au/conservation/publications-forms-and-permits/forms-and-permits/scientific-permits-and-authorities-to-collect-native-flora
Permit application form to apply for the ‘taking’ of native flora completed and attached.
3. Collection methods: record on seed collection record
Taking advantage of fallen limbs; pole pruner, secateurs or loppers for removing smaller branched or seed bunches; using a pole pruner to drop small branches or seed onto tarpaulin, hand picking, cover seed lot with hessian or other bags to catch highly dehiscent seed.

 4. Tools and equipment:  To be listed on checklist (see attached)
Collecting
ladders, ropes, pole pruners, secateurs, saws, binoculars, hand lens, bow and arrow or rifle, identification guides, maps, compass, camera, clipboards and note paper, blower vac. Plastic and paper bags, pencils, gps
Cleaning: Sieves, plates, tweezers, jars and water, secateurs

5. PPE required:  To be listed on checklist (see attached)
Collecting: Safety boots, first aid kit, hi vis, safety glasses, gloves, sunscreen, water, wet weather clothing
Cleaning: Mask and gloves

6.  Complete and attach one (1) risk assessment for seed collection and cleaning and one (1) for environmental impact.  A minimum of an additional two (2) hazards are to be added for each assessment. (see attached)
Student to complete Risk Assessment and Environmental Impact Assessment (attached)
7.  Review your workplan and list any changes.  This may be location, species collected, permits/permission or tools and equipment

 
Work Plan
Species required for collection:
Species	Location	Quantity	Flowering/availability
Eucalyptus obliqua	Freer Farm	 200 seeds	Jan-Apr available most of year
1)	Answers will vary dependant on species collected			
2)				
3)				
4)				
5)				
6)				
7)				
8)				
9)				
10)				

 
Tools and equipment checklist for seed collection
Tools and equipment	Tick	PPE	Tick
e.g. Pole Pruner			
Answers will vary dependant on species collected			
			
			
			
			
			
			
			
			
			
			
			

 
Work Plan
Permits/Permission obtained (attach)	Permit attached
Tools and equipment cleaned and maintained  	Tools and equipment cleaned
Risk and environment impact assessment completed	Risk Assessment and Environmental Assessment completed

Work plan review
Changes from review	Student and Teacher/Supervisor
Signature and date
Students to demonstrate that they have reviewed their Work Plan, discussed with the Assessor or Supervisor and made changes accordingly	
	
	
	
	
	

                                      
 
Seed Collection Record
Plant community key: Coastal-C, Urban-U, Riparian-R, Wet Euc-WE, Dry Euc-DE, Rainforest-RF
Genus species	Seed collection location and plant community	Collection date	Collector’s name	Quantity or weight	Storage/ viability	Collection method	Stored and labelled
Example only

Eucalyptus viminalis
	WE
Freer Farm	6-2-22	Jo Bloggs	50 grams	8-10 years 
	Pole pruner and ground sheet	E Block Burnie campus
1.
Answers will vary							
2.
							
3.
							
4.
							
5.
							
6.
							
7.
							
8.
							
9.
							
10.
							


Risk Assessment developed by:		Signature:		Date:	
Job Description or Task	Detail task
Task or Activity	HAZARDS	POTENTIAL IMPACTS	Likelihood	Consequence	RISK RATING
E/H/M/L	HAZARD CONTROLS AND SAFE WORK METHODS	Likelihood	Consequence	RISK RATING
E/H/M/L
Seed collecting	Slips, trips, falls	Personal injury	3	2	M6	Avoid slippery logs, loose rocks, steep embankments
Avoid carrying heavy or awkward objects on uneven ground	3	1	M3
	Manual handling	Personal injury	3	2	M6	Minimise distance for carrying
Rotate tasks, weight limits
Training
Warm-up stretches	3	1	M3
									
									
Seed collecting									
									
									

 
Environmental Impact and Control Assessment
Task Assessed:
Assessed by:	Date:
Authorised by:	Date:
Hazards checklist: tick if relevant and refer below for details including control measures:
o	Air quality (dust / emissions)	o	Hazardous waste disposal	o	Traffic and parking
o	Heritage / archaeology	o	Waste disposal (general)	o	Refuelling
o	Habitats (protected flora / fauna)	o	Storm water / sediment / erosion control	o	Other chemicals (inc storage)
o	Vegetation	o	Contaminated soil / water	o	Spills & response (general)
o	Animal impacts (biodiversity)	o	Cross contamination (from vehicles / plant)	o	Noise (leaving the site)
Other 	
Task	Environmental Impact	Control Measures	Who is responsible for controls?	Date / Sign Off
Seed collecting	Disturbing fauna	Minimal disturbance, don’t disturb nests	All person involved in collecting	
	Over collecting	Min. 20% from one plant	All person involved in collecting	
	Breaking branches	Use clean secateurs	All person involved in collecting	
				
				
				
				
				

 
RISK RATING MATRIX

	
Consequence 
Likelihood	4. Major 
(e.g. death/ disability)	3. Serious
(e.g. serious injury/ lost time)	2. Minor 
(e.g. first aid injury)	1. Insignificant 
(e.g. incident but not injury)
4.Very likely 
(and will almost certainly happen)	Extreme16	High12	High8	Medium4
3.Likely 
(and will probably happen at some time)	High12	High9	Medium6	Medium3
2.Unlikely 
(but could happen at some time)	High8	Medium6	Medium4	Low2
1.Very unlikely 
(and might happen only rarely)	Medium4	Medium3	Low2	Low1
LIKELIHOOD X CONSEQUENCE = RISK RATING
E.g.       2 Unlikely x 3 Serious = Medium 6

  

Assessment Task 2 – Work Plan and Collection Record
Comments and feedback	
Assessor name	
Assessor signature	
Date	
☐ Satisfactory
☐ Not Satisfactory / Resubmit required	 ☐ Resubmit Due	
 
Assessment Task 3 – Performance Tasks
Observation Record – Collect native seed
Student name	
Unit code and title	AHCECR305 Collect native seed
Location of observations	☐ TasTAFE	☐ Work Placement
☐ Workplace	☐ Other
Date Observation 1:	
		Location 1	
	☐ TasTAFE	☐ Work Placement
☐ Workplace	☐ Other
Date Observation 2:	
		Location 2	
Other comments	
Instructions for Assessment Task 3:	There are 9 Performance Tasks required for this unit.  These tasks provide an opportunity for you to demonstrate the skills required for competence in this unit.
You need to demonstrate the skills and knowledge required to:

	seek and obtain permission and approval to collect seed from at least one of the following protected environments or people, including:
	local government or roadside
	state forest
	national park
	Indigenous elders or custodians on country
	private property
	use and maintain materials, equipment and resources efficiently and safely
	identify seed species accurately
	follow workplace policies and procedures for collecting seed
	assess the seed against quality standards for seed collection
	accurately record seed collection information and results.

Your teacher will negotiate a date and location for this assessment task.

Assessors’ comments will vary according to the student and their workplace.

If the Assessor cannot observe all task below, then the assessor and student will need to negotiate another time so the observation can be completed. 

Second observation will only be required if the first observation is not completed satisfactorily.


Performance Tasks	Obs 1	Obs 2	Comment relating to when and how the skills were demonstrated
1.	Environmental legislation for seed collecting followed			£	Maximum of 20% seeds taken.
£	Minimal impact/Tread lightly.
£	Permit/permission as required.
£	Information may be documented or observed
2.	Work plan reviewed for seed collection.			£	Location, equipment, species, permission/permits 
3.	Communicate with others involved in seed collection including questioning, active listening, asking for clarification, seeking advice and sharing information.			£	Students sharing information during collection. 
£	Advice sought or documented during collection of seed.
4.	Select, use, maintain, calibrate and prepare materials, tools, equipment and resources			£	Checklist for tools & equipment completed in workplan. 
£	Tools cleaned and maintained.  ☐ Scales calibrated. 
5.	Follow and apply WHS and organisational policies and procedures			£	Risk assessment for Seed collection/cleaning/environmental impact completed and followed
6.	Distinguish and assess health and condition of parent plants			£	Check for insects and disease prior to collection
7.	Collect seed using appropriate collection methods			£	Collection methods reported on work plan and collection record
8.	Clean, label, store and weigh seed as required			£	Chaff, twigs, and leaves removed.
£	Sieved, if necessary, weighed
£	Labelled accurately and storage location determined.
9.	Record and report seed collection information			£	All required information recorded on Work plan and seed collection record 

Verbal Process Questions (ensure verbal questions and student responses are recorded)
These are the questions that the teacher may ask the student to confirm understanding or confirm problem solving and contingency skills.	S	NS
a)	 Detail any verbal questions asked and student response in full

Response:

		
b)	 

Response:

		
c)	 


Response:

		



Assessment Task 3 – Performance Tasks - Observation
Comments and feedback	
Assessor name	
Assessor signature	
Date	
☐ Satisfactory
☐ Not Satisfactory / Resubmit required	 ☐ Resubmit Due	
 
